# SMPL

## What is SMPL?
SMPL (pronounced 'simple') is the Simple Modular Physical Link system, an
ecosystem of hardware components designed to make creating a test, measurement,
and control system the easiest possible experience with minimal soldering and
customization required. The system was designed by Leeman Geophysical LLC in
2022 and released in 2023 as an open standard. The design goal was simple - to
eliminate the technical challenges faced by scientists and industrial
integrators when creating solutions to basic data acquisition and control
problems. All too often we see the problem of `I need to measure and record the
output of this load cell and displacement transducer' solved with \$5000 of very
nice, but greatly over specified data acquisition systems sold on the market
today.

The truth of the matter is, all systems in the end convert a physical
measurement to a voltage. That voltage is then measured and recorded. The
transformation from physical to voltage happens as a combination of the
transducer technology chosen and the signal conditioning required to turn the
transducer output into a signal of the proper range. SMPL provides building
blocks to work with sensors and actuators of many forms, but reducing them to
raw voltages going across standard connectors. This means a simple voltage
input/output data acquisition system may be used to interface to practically any
instrument without the need for specialized and expensive proprietary DAQ system
components. SMPL is data acquisition system agnostic. It can be used with
anything from a volt meter to a paper strip chart recorder to a high frequency
and high bit depth precision analog to digital converter.

With the building block nature of the SMPL components, a simple block diagram
drawing of your system almost directly converts into a purchasing list and
hookup diagram. This saves time in design and lets your system build on the
years of experience our team has interfacing with sensors in applications
ranging from livestock monitoring to grain bin assessment to rock mechanics
apparatus.

## Who is SMPL For?
In short, everyone who doesn't want to waste time dealing with the minutia of
interfacing to their transducers. SMPL was designed with research and
development laboratories in mind as often during the course of R&D the exact
system needed is not a well defined problem as it is in many more traditional
engineering projects. Maybe the load or displacement of the system is less than
expected and more gain is needed, maybe the analog to digital converter left
from a previous project has a different voltage range than the instrumentation
available, or maybe you need 4 sensors instead of 2. SMPL makes all of that
simple!

The modular nature of SMPL makes it easy to expand, remix, reuse, and alter on
the fly. SMPL is the nuts and bolts of the electronic data acquisition world.
Keeping some cables, modules, and a smattering of transducers in the lab means
you can rapidly test hypotheses and build a system that grows with your research
ambitions and ideas.

SMPL isn't only for the laboratory though. It can be an economical choice for
industrial control and monitoring applications. Industrial measurement
applications often go through many iterations as the plant equipment is changed,
new requirements present themselves, or technologies evolve. The modular nature
of SMPL also makes maintenance easy as technicians can swap modules as opposed
to spending time troubleshooting large complex blocks. Downtime can be reduced
by swapping the easily identifiable SMPL modules pushing the troubleshooting to
offline times while the plant is back up and running.

## Don't See What you Need?
Maybe you've looked through the book, but are not finding something that helps
with your problem. Let us know! Drop a line to [support](../support.md) and
an applications engineer will get back with you to help you find a solution to
your problem. It could be that an existing product will work or you may inspire
the next addition to the SMPL family.